# Marsh sediments chronically exposed to nitrogen enrichment contain degraded organic matter that is less vulnerable to decomposition via nitrate reduction
### **Authors:** Ashley N. Bulseco, Anne E. Murphy, Anne E. Giblin, Jane Tucker, Jonathan Sanderman, Jennifer L. Bowen

#### Quick Info
- Link to the publication in 'Science of the Total Environment': (https://www-sciencedirect-com.unh.idm.oclc.org/science/article/pii/S0048969723083110)
- Raw fastq files available in the NCBI Sequence Read Archive under BioProject ID PRJNA1014411
- Samples were sequenced on an Illumina MiSeq located at UMass Boston (Boston, MA) using a 500-cycle V2 Sequencing kit in July and September of 2017. We followed protocols according to the Earth Microbiome http://www.earthmicrobiome.org/protocols-and-standards/16s/ and analyzed sequences using QIIME 2 (v2019.20). 

**********

**Abstract**:
Blue carbon habitats, including salt marshes, can sequester carbon at rates that are an order of magnitude greater than terrestrial forests. This ecosystem service may be under threat from nitrate (NO3−) enrichment, which can shift the microbial community and stimulate decomposition of organic matter. Despite efforts to mitigate nitrogen loading, salt marshes continue to experience chronic NO3− enrichment, however, the long-term consequence of this enrichment on carbon storage remains unclear. To investigate the effect of chronic NO3− exposure on salt marsh organic matter decomposition, we collected sediments from three sites across a range of prior NO3− exposure: a relatively pristine marsh, a marsh enriched to ~70 μmol L−1 NO3− in the flooding seawater for 13 years, and a marsh enriched between 100 and 1000 μmol L−1 for 40 years from wastewater treatment effluent. We collected sediments from 20 to 25 cm depth and determined that sediments from the most chronically enriched site had less bioavailable organic matter and a distinct assemblage of active microbial taxa compared to the other two sites. We also performed a controlled anaerobic decomposition experiment to test whether the legacy of NO3− exposure influenced the functional response to additional NO3−. We found significant changes to microbial community composition resulting from experimental NO3− addition. Experimental NO3− addition also increased microbial respiration in sediments collected from all sites. However, sediments from the most chronically enriched site exhibited the smallest increase, the lowest rates of total NO3− reduction by dissimilatory nitrate reduction to ammonium (DNRA), and the highest DNF:DNRA ratios. Our results suggest that chronic exposure to elevated NO3− may lead to residual pools of organic matter that are less biologically available for decomposition. Thus, it is important to consider the legacy of nutrient exposure when examining the carbon cycle of salt marsh sediments.


